551-0326-00L (2017) 
Concept Lectures in Cell Biology 

Cell Biology 
S. Werner, U. Auf dem Keller, 
W. Kovacs, W. Krek, M. Schäfer, 
U. Suter, A. Wutz 
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences 
ETH Zürich 

http://www.mhs.biol.ethz.ch/ 



Goals of the Lecture Series 


1. 
To prepare you for successful and efficient work in Cell Biology and related fields 
• Learning how to ask relevant and important questions (i.e. develop hypotheses) 
• Learning how to use the appropriate experimental strategies and 
techniques in a research project 
2. 
To provide you with the background and context that foster cross-disciplinary 
scientific thinking which is essential in modern Cell Biology 
3. 
Current Concepts in research in Cell Biology 

Basis / Basics 


"Molecular Biology of the Cell" 
Alberts et al., 6th Edition 

Disclaimer to my Presentations: “Peter et al.” means almost always “modified after Peter et al.” 
Papers that are referred to in my lectures can be found on Moodle in full text (PDF) 



Exam 


Each lecturer will provide you with her/his 
requirements for the exam individually 


For my part 


The contents of the lectures 
form the basis of the exam 



Introductory Remarks to My Lectures 


• Some slides may contain major text: I will not always read through those slides 
word-by-word, or I may even jump over them during lecturing, since they are often 
designed as summaries (also concepts, questions) to support you in following 
the general flow of the lectures (i.e. keeping the red line spanning the lectures) 
• Active participation: Due to the size of your group of students, the heterogeneity in 
your backgrounds, and the available time, my part of the course will contain mainly 
lecturing, illustrated by some movies 
Since discussion time will be limited, do not hesitate to ask questions, during the 
break, or also by interrupting me during the lectures! 

It would be great if you could go quickly through the slides of the previous 
couple of lectures before the next ones start, at home, in the train, or elsewhere 
(to keep up with the flow and to be able to participate actively continuously) 



What is the Basis of a Successful Scientific Project? 


•What would you like to know? 
• Is this Question relevant and important? 
•What are the Goals or Aims of your studies? 
•How do you plan to get there? 
•What are the Methods and Experimental Techniques: 
a) that are available? 
b) that are most appropriate to answer your question? 

Key Questions 


How do cells form a tissue? 


(How do tissues form an organ?) 


• In Development 
• In Homeostasis 
• In Regeneration 
• In Diseases 
How can we study this? 
How are new hypotheses and concepts being developed? 



The Chosen Model: The Nervous System (Amazing Numbers) 


100 Billions (1011) Neurons 
*100 Billions Glia Cells 
1014 Synaptic Connections 
>> Memories stored 
(Human Brain: 2% of body 

mass, uses 20% of resting 
energy production) 


*Regional CNS differences in the ratio of glia numbers to neurons 



More Specific Model: Myelination of the Nervous System 



Oligodendrocytes (CNS) 


Schwann 
Cells (PNS) 


Main Purpose: Increase of speed and 
efficiency at which neural impulses travel 
along myelinated fibers: Improvement and 
regulation of information transfer 

Example Corpus Callosum 


It takes about 30 ms for an action potential to 
traverse the corpus callosum (which connects 
the left and right cerebral cortex) through a 


myelinated axon 


It takes about 300 ms to do the same through 
an unmyelinated corpus callosum axon 



Swadlow et al., 1978; Fields et al., 2015 



Nave and Werner, 2014 

General Result of Myelination (CNS Axons Cross-Section) 


Multiple cell membrane layers stacked together on top of each other in a repetitive manner 
(PNS myelin looks comparable with minor structural differences) 



Already in the Midst of Questions Over Questions… 


• How is the system built and optimized for its function? 
Anatomy / structure as basis of physiology 

• Which cell types are involved with which function? 
Cellular and molecular basis of functions 

• How does the system develop? How is it maintained? 
• How does the system regenerate after insults (injury, disease)? 
• Is the system plastic during development and / or adulthood? 
If yes, does this have functional consequences? 
• Is this relevant for diseases affecting the tissue? 

Specific Goal of the Coming Lectures 


• We will use Myelination and Myelinated Neurons (Axon-Glia 
Interactions), and Diseases that are Associated with Myelinated 
Neurons, as Examples to obtain and discuss a General Conceptual 
Framework of how to analyze and understand functionally complex 
events of cellular interactions in vertebrate / mammalian tissues in 
health and disease 
• This knowledge and way-of-thinking is, conceptually, also 
applicable as “General Theme” to other cells, tissues and 
organs (with variations) 
• Particular questions: What / how can we learn for / from diseases? 

What is the Significance of 
the Research Topic? 


Why Are the Studies Relevant? 



How Much to Invest at which Level? 


Francis Collins, Head of NIH, 2012 

“Our second lesson is often easier said than done: get to the root 
of the problem. When confronted with heartbreaking human need 
and urgent clinical challenges, it is tempting to race ahead to exploring 
therapeutic possibilities before gaining a firm, or even tentative, grasp 
on the molecular roots of a disease. But much time, money, and, 
ultimately, lives may be lost if a translational research team rushes into 
clinical trials without a basic understanding of the molecular mechanisms 
underlying the disease in question” (My addition :…and without a 
thorough understanding of the development, structure and normal 
function of the affected tissue). 

Symbiotic and converging use of disease-oriented and basic-science 
approaches (i.e. to learn from each research direction) is the key to success 


Gordon et al., 2012 



Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPS cells) 


No immune rejection! 
Found by screening of 
combinations of factors 
that were known from 
basic science to be 
critical for the biology 
of Embryonic Stem Cells 

Cell Reprogramming in Neuroscience (Status: End 2015) 

www.nature.com/nrn/posters/ipsc 



Sources and Targets of Human Glial Progenitor Cells 


1. 2. 

(Myelinating Cell 
Progenitors) 


Osario and Goldman, 2016 



What is the Significance of Myelination? 



What is the Significance of Myelination (I)? 


CNS: 

Major Diseases 
• Leukodystrophies (genetic myelin deficiencies) 
• Multiple Sclerosis (most prevalent neurodegenerative disease in young adults) 
• Neonatal White Matter Disorders (early preterm-born: Hypoxia, cerebral palsy) 
• Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS: Metabolic support of neurons / axons) 
• Psychiatric Disorders (schizophrenia / neural circuit abnormalities) 
• Memory Decline in Aging (correlated with reduced amounts of myelin) 
• Regulation of Repair: Spinal cord injury, neural regeneration (trauma), stroke 
PNS: 

• 
Peripheral Neuropathies (Inherited, inflammation, toxins, diabetes; affect motor 
and / or sensory system; often progressing with age) 

What is the Overall Significance of Myelination (II)? 


General Broad Summary 
Vertebrate myelination is an evolutionary 
advancement that is essential for motor, 
sensory, and higher order 
cognition function 


Bercury and Macklin, 2015 



What is the Basic Significance of Myelination (III)? 


Homeostasis / Plasticity of the Nervous System 
• 
Myelination enhances nerve conduction velocity 
• 
Myelinating glia provide support to neurons / axons (trophic, metabolic) 
• 
Myelinating oligodendrocytes regulate neuronal network behavior, and how neural 
circuits operate, by an intricate cross talk with neurons / axons, involving also 
neuronal activity (recent discovery) 
• 
Oligodendrocyte-derived myelin can grow, remodel, and appears to be plastic, even 
in the adult, also modulated by environmental factors, with functional consequences 
for the neural circuits involved (recent discovery) 
• 
Some learning and training are accompanied by adaptive myelination and neuronal 
plasticity, i.e. myelination increases and neural circuits may get strengthened, 
and / or stabilized, and / or fine tuned (recent discovery) 
• 
Myelination is also likely to restrict neural plasticity involving factors that inhibit 
neuronal growth i.e. puts the final touch on circuit crystallization (recent discovery) 
De Hoz and Simons, 2014 


J. Neurosci. (2014), 34,14777-14782 
Alcohol Binge Drinking During Adolescence or Dependence During 
Adulthood Reduces Prefrontal Myelin in Male Rats 
Vargas et al. 

Teen binge drinking is associated with low frontal white matter integrity and increased risk of 
alcoholism in adulthood. This neuropathology may result from alcohol exposure or reflect a 
pre-existing condition in people prone to addiction. Here we used rodent models with 
documented clinical relevance to adolescent binge drinking and alcoholism in humans to test 
whether alcohol damages myelinated axons of the prefrontal cortex. In Experiment 1, outbred 
male Wistar rats self-administered sweetened alcohol or sweetened water intermittently for 2 
weeks during early adolescence. In adulthood, drinking behavior was tested under 
nondependent conditions or after dependence induced by 1 month of alcohol vapor 
intoxication/withdrawal cycles, and prefrontal myelin was examined 1 month into abstinence. 
Adolescent binge drinking or adult dependence induction reduced the size of the anterior 
branches of the corpus callosum, i.e., forceps minor (CCFM), and this neuropathology 
correlated with higher relapse-like drinking in adulthood. Degraded myelin basic protein in the 
gray matter medial to the CCFM of binge rats indicated myelin was damaged on axons in the 
mPFC. In follow-up studies we found that binge drinking reduced myelin density in the mPFC 
in adolescent rats (Experiment 2) and heavier drinking predicted worse performance on the Tmaze 
working memory task in adulthood (Experiment 3). These findings establish a causal 
role of voluntary alcohol on myelin and give insight into specific prefrontal axons that are both 
sensitive to alcohol and could contribute to the behavioral and cognitive impairments 
associated with early onset drinking and alcoholism. 


The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is the cerebral cortex which covers the front part of the frontal 
lobe. 
There is an integral link between a person's personality and the functions of the prefrontal 
cortex. This brain region has been implicated in planning complex cognitive behavior, 
personality expression, decision making, and moderating social behavior. The basic activity of 
this brain region is considered to be orchestration of thoughts and actions in accordance with 
internal goals (concentration, orientation, abstracting ability, judgment, and problem solving 
ability, social behavior) 
The most typical psychological term for functions carried out by the prefrontal cortex area is 
executive function. Executive function relates to abilities to differentiate among conflicting 
thoughts, determine good and bad, better and best, same and different, future consequences 
of current activities, working toward a defined goal, prediction of outcomes, expectation based 
on actions, and social "control" (the ability to suppress urges that, if not suppressed, could lead 
to socially unacceptable outcomes) 
Wikipedia 
The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is the cerebral cortex which covers the front part of the frontal 
lobe. 
There is an integral link between a person's personality and the functions of the prefrontal 
cortex. This brain region has been implicated in planning complex cognitive behavior, 
personality expression, decision making, and moderating social behavior. The basic activity of 
this brain region is considered to be orchestration of thoughts and actions in accordance with 
internal goals (concentration, orientation, abstracting ability, judgment, and problem solving 
ability, social behavior) 
The most typical psychological term for functions carried out by the prefrontal cortex area is 
executive function. Executive function relates to abilities to differentiate among conflicting 
thoughts, determine good and bad, better and best, same and different, future consequences 
of current activities, working toward a defined goal, prediction of outcomes, expectation based 
on actions, and social "control" (the ability to suppress urges that, if not suppressed, could lead 
to socially unacceptable outcomes) 
Wikipedia 

Specific Questions and Goals of the Coming Lectures 


• How does the process of myelination achieve its critical functions 
and how is this system regulated? 
• How were the current concepts developed that underlie the 
knowledge about myelination and its function? How are they still 
being refined? What are the major open questions in this 
context? 
• 
Particular question: What (and how) can we learn from diseases 
that affect myelinated structures about the basic function of the 
system? And Vice Versa: What can we learn from basic studies 
for potential treatments of such diseases? 

The Basis / Basics 


Functional Anatomy and Physiology 
A Cell Biology Point of View 



How Do Axons Interact with Myelinating Cells? 
CNS - Oligodendrocytes PNS - Schwann Cells 



Internodes 


Myelination 


Nodes of Ranvier 


Most Oligodendrocytes have 
20- 60 myelinating processes 
One Schwann cell 
forms one internode 

Structure is a critical determinant of function 



Structural Organization of a Myelinated Neuron 


Initiation and Propagation of Action Potential 



AIS: Axon initial segment 

Red: Unmyelinated axon areas enriched in voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav) 

Freeman et al., 2015 



Impulse Conduction in Unmyelinated Axons 


The red arrows show the flow of action currents in local circuits into the active 
region of the membrane 

In unmyelinated fibers, the circuits flow through the adjacent piece of membrane 


Action Potential Propagation 



Principles of Neurobiology, 2015 (I) 



Impulse Conduction in Unmyelinated (top) and 
Myelinated (bottom) Nerve Fibers 



The red arrows show the flow of action currents in local circuits into the active region of the 
membrane. In unmyelinated fibers, the circuits flow through the adjacent piece of membrane; in 
myelinated fibers, the circuit flow jumps to the next node. 

Rasband and Macklin, 2012 


What Are the Main Effects of Myelination 
to Achieve Fast Nerve Conduction (I)? 


Myelin is an electrical insulator, although its function of facilitating conduction in axons 
has no exact analogy in electrical circuitry. In unmyelinated fibers, impulse conduction 
is propagated by local circuits of ion current that flow into the active region of the 
axonal membrane, through the axon, and out through adjacent sections of the 
membrane. These local circuits depolarize the adjacent piece of membrane in a 
continuous sequential fashion. In myelinated axons, the excitable axonal membrane is 
exposed to the extracellular space only at the nodes of Ranvier; this is the location of 
sodium channels. When the membrane at the node is excited, the local circuit 
generated cannot flow through the high-resistance sheath and therefore flows out 
through and depolarizes the membrane at the next node, which might be 1 mm or 
farther away. The low capacitance of the sheath means that little energy is required to 
depolarize the remaining membrane between the nodes, which results in an increased 
speed of local circuit spreading. Active excitation of the axonal membrane jumps from 
node to node; this form of impulse propagation is called saltatory conduction (Latin 
saltare, “to jump”). Such movement of the wave of depolarization is much more rapid 
than is the case in unmyelinated fibers. Furthermore, because only the nodes of 
Ranvier are excited during conduction in myelinated fibers, sodium flux into the nerve 
is much less than in unmyelinated fibers, where the entire membrane is involved. 

Rasband and Macklin, 2012 



Action Potential Followed Along a Myelinated Fiber 




Key to Understanding: 


Structure is a 
Major Determinant of Function 



Oligodendrocyte – Neuron (CNS Myelin) Structure Overview 



Snaidero and Simons, 2014 



Basic Question 


What is the mechanism by which an 
oligodendrocyte extends its plasma 
membrane to wrap axons and 
to generate the multilayered 
compact myelin sheath 
around axons? 



Nave and Werner, 2014 


Differentiation of Committed Oligodendrocyte Progenitor cell (OPC) Into 
Mature Myelinating Oligodendrocyte as a Series of Cellular Processes 


Myelin outgrowth occurs at the innermost tongue and at the lateral edges 
A. B. C. D. 
E. 
F. 
Some small 
incisures 
remain, in 
particular in 
myelin 
associated 
with large axons 
Incisure opening is 
regulated by 
phosphatidylinositol-
(3,4,5)-triphosphate 
(PIP3) levels 

Model of the Directions of How Oligodendrocyes / 
Myelin Wrap Around Axons 


Incisures (cytoplasmic 
channels spiraling through 
developing myelin): Tracks 
for the delivery of newly 
synthesized membranes 
(vesicles) to the 
growing tip 


Leading edge of 
the inner tongue 
drives myelination 



Two distinct, but 
coordinated motions 


1. Wrapping of the leading edge 
at the inner tongue around the 
axon underneath the previously 
deposited membrane 
(i.e. build up of more wraps) 
2. 
Lateral extension of myelin 
membrane layers toward the 
nodal regions 
(i.e. build up of longer sheaths) 
Snaidero and Simons, 2014; Simons and Nave, 2015 



Current Model of CNS Myelination 



Chang et al., 2016 



Conceptual Steps* Leading to CNS Myelination 


1. Proliferation and migration of oligodendrocyte precursor cells 
(OPCs) in white matter tracts 
2. Recognition of target axons and axon–glia signaling 
3. Differentiation of OPCs into myelinating oligodendrocytes 
4. Membrane outgrowth and axonal wrapping 
5. Trafficking of membrane components 
6. Myelin compaction (extrusion of cytoplasm) 
7. Nodes of Ranvier formation 
*Analytical (intellectual) dissection of individual parts of the process: “What to study” 

Simons and Nave, 2015 



Actin Dynamics at Different Stages of CNS Myelination 



Actin depolymerization 

F-actin predominates 

(G-actin) predominates 

The leading edge of the inner turn expresses F-actin. Actin disassembly facilitates membrane 
spreading and supports possibly iterative cycles of polymerization / depolymerization 
to drive the protrusion (controversial) 



Jayshree and Salzer, 2015 



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867413015304 Snaidero et al., 2014 



How is Proper Myelin Compaction Achieved 
as a Requirement for Correct Function? 



Anatomy of the Neuromuscular System 


Large Caliber Motor and Sensory Axons Are Myelinated 


PNS (Myelin formed by Schwann cells) 


CNS (Myelin formed by Oligodendrocytes) 
Burgess et al., 2009 



Multi-Layered Appearance / Compaction of PNS Myelin* 



IPL: Intraperiod line 
MDL: Major dense line 

SLI: 
Schmidt-Lanterman Incisures (cytosolic channel 
(spiral-shaped) of uncompacted myelin transversing 
compact myelin); not prominently 
present in adult CNS myelin

 
(cytoplasmic channels) 
*CNS compact myelin structure is 
comparable, with minor differences 

Nave and Werner, 2014 


Multi-Layered PNS Myelin Compaction 



IPL: Intraperiod line 
MDL: Major dense line 



P0: Protein Zero 
(IgCAM) 


MBP: Myelin Basic 
Protein 



Salzer, 2015; Nave and Werner, 2014 



Peripheral Nerve “Myelin” Without P0 Protein 



Möbius et al., 2016 



Intracellular Compaction of CNS Myelin (MDL) 
Is Driven by Increasing MBP Concentration 


• Compaction starts from outside, 
progressing to the inside 
• At increased concentration, MBP binds 
apposed membranes together 
Mechanism of IPL / extracellular membrane compaction 
in the CNS remains largely unclear (no P0 protein) 

Chang et al., 2016 



CNS (Optic) Nerve Without MBP (Shiverer Mouse) 



(PNS myelin is virtually normal in Shiverer mice; compensation by highly basic C-terminus of P0) 


Möbius et al., 2016 



What Is the Molecular Composition of Myelin? 
CNS / PNS? 


How Does the Composition Determine 
Structure and Function? 



Molecular Anatomy of Myelin 



SDS-Gels of CNS Myelin versus PNS Myelin (Proteins) 

CNS PNS 


De Monasteiro-Schrader et al., 2012 Patzig et al., 2011 



Different Developmental Origin of Myelinating Cells 


Oligodendrocyte Generation from Neurepithelium 



Three sequential waves of OPCs (OPC-1, OPC-2 and Two waves of OPCs emanate from the 
OPC-3) are generated during embryo development ventral or dorso-lateral regions of the 
from different regions of the forebrain ventricular zone spinal cord in the embryo. A third wave 

OPC: Oligodendrocyte-progenitors (cells) / -precursors (cells) 
begins after birth 

Rowitch and Kriegstein, 2010 


Schwann Cells Are Neural Crest Stem Cell-Derived 


Mid-Gestation 
Schwann Cells 



Venn Diagram Comparison of Myelin Proteins in the CNS Versus PNS 


Mass-Spectrometry 

De Monasteiro-Schrader et al., 2012 


Relative Abundance of Dominant Myelin Proteins / Disease Relevance 


PNS 
PNS 
CNS 
CNS 
ND: Not detected 

Nave and Werner, 2014 


Myelination: Large Amounts of Lipid and 
Membrane Production Required 


• During myelination, the membrane surface area has to expand several thousand-fold 
Birth-Adult comparison of myelinating Schwann cell 


• Myelin has a high lipid-to-protein ratio compared to other cell membranes 
-Approx. 70 - 80% lipids / 20 - 30% proteins by dry weight (species-dependent) 
-Enrichment in cholesterol and glycosphingolipids 
Chrast et al., 2011 



Critical Relevance of Lipid Regulation in Myelination 


-C 
Squalene Synthase- 
(Cholesterol)-deficiency in 
Schwann cells causes hypomyelination 



Cholesterol, de novo synthesized 
in myelinating glia, is required for 
myelin growth and compaction 
(PNS and CNS) 
Saher et al., 2009; Schmitt et al., 2014 



Myelinated Peripheral Nerves Consist 
Not Only of Myelinated Axons 


Myelinated Peripheral Nerves as “Organs” 
Structure and Function 



Architecture of an Adult Peripheral Nerve 


Teased Nerve 


Jessen et al., 2015 

Teased Nerve Fiber: Internodal Segment 



(From Sciatic Nerve) 


Nave and Werner, 2014 



What is the Cellular Basis of 
Saltatory Nerve Conduction 
in Myelinated Fibers? 



What Are the Main Effects of Myelination 
to Achieve Fast Nerve Conduction (II)? 


1. 
Myelination leads to increased effective resistance, decreased effective 
capacitance of myelinated axons (“insulation of the axon”) 
2. (PNS*) 
v v v 
Basis of Saltatory Conduction 
*CNS structure 
is comparable 



Conceptual Example of Cell-Cell Interactions 
The myelinating Schwann cell determines the organization 
of the axonal membrane by direct physical interactions 
(CNS oligodendrocytes organize axons in a comparable way) 
N: Node of Ranvier P: Paranode 
JXP 
JXP: Juxtaparanode 
v v v 

Adhesion Proteins, Cytoskeleton Proteins, ECM and Connecting 
Proteins Determine the Integrity and Structure of the Node of Ranvier 



CAM, cell adhesion molecule; ECM, extracellular matrix; JXP, juxtaparanode; PNJ, paranodal junction 
(Note the PNS / CNS difference at the Node) Zollinger et al., 2015 



Are Paranodal Junctions Functionally Relevant? 



Schema of Myelinated Domains of Myelinated Neuron 



Arancibia-Carcamo and Attwell, 2014 



Caspr Knock-Out (NULL) Mouse (PNS*) 



• Paranodal shift of Kv1.1 channels in Caspr1 -/- mutants 
• Paranodal, Septate-like Junctions act as fence in axonal membrane 
Lack of Septate- 
like Junctions in 
Caspr -/- mutants: 
Paranodal Organization (PNS/CNS) 

Decreased Nerve Conduction Velocity 

*CNS shows a comparable phenotype 

Bhat et al., 2001; Buttermore et al., 2013 


Hum. Mol. Genet. (2014), 23, 2279-2289 

Mutations in CNTNAP1 (CASPR) and ADCY6 Are Responsible for Severe 
Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita With Axoglial Defects 


Laquérriere et al. 

Non-syndromic arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is characterized by multiple 
congenital contractures resulting from reduced fetal mobility. Genetic mapping and whole 
exome sequencing (WES) were performed in 31 multiplex and/or consanguineous 
undiagnosed AMC families. Although this approach identified known AMC genes, we here 
report pathogenic mutations in two new genes. Homozygous frameshift mutations in 
CNTNAP1 were found in four unrelated families. Patients showed a marked reduction in 
motor nerve conduction velocity (<10 m/s) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of 
sciatic nerve in the index cases revealed severe abnormalities of both nodes of Ranvier 
width and myelinated axons. CNTNAP1 encodes CASPR, an essential component of 
node of Ranvier domains which underlies saltatory conduction of action potentials along 
the myelinated axons, an important process for neuronal function. A homozygous 
missense mutation in adenylate cyclase 6 gene (ADCY6) was found in another family 
characterized by a lack of myelin in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) as determined 
by TEM. Morpholino knockdown of the zebrafish orthologs led to severe and specific 
defects in peripheral myelin in spite of the presence of Schwann cells. ADCY6 encodes a 
protein that belongs to the adenylate cyclase family responsible for the synthesis of cAMP. 
Elevation of cAMP can mimic axonal contact in vitro and upregulates myelinating signals. 
Our data indicate an essential and so far unknown role of ADCY6 in PNS myelination 
likely through the cAMP pathway. Mutations of genes encoding proteins of Ranvier 
domains or involved in myelination of Schwann cells are responsible for novel and severe 
human axoglial diseases. 


Non-Syndromic Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita 



• 
Facial diplegia 
(paralysis of both sides 
of the face) 
• 
Distal joint retractions 
(contractures due to 
reduced fetal mobility) 
• Usually lethal within the 
first weeks postnatally 
ADCY6 mutants; comparable phenotype to CNTNAP1 (CASPR) mutants 

Laquérriere et al., 2014 


Adhesion Proteins, Cytoskeleton Proteins, ECM, and Connecting (Often Scaffolding) 
Proteins Determine the Integrity and Structure of the Node of Ranvier (CNS) 


Often: 
Astrocyte 
process on 
top of Node 
Arancibia-Carcamo and Attwell, 2014 



Analogy to Structural Organization of Synapses 



• Close membrane connections to be maintained 
• Pre- and post-synaptic accumulation of electron-dense material 

(Partial) Molecular Organization of Synapse 



Figure 19-22c Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2008) 


Summary of Main Cellular Basis of Fast Nerve Conduction 



Physical properties of myelinated axon fibers plus strict organization 
of nodal areas by myelinating glia – axon interactions 



Summary of the Functions of Interactions Between 
Axons and Myelinating Cells at the Node of Ranvier 


• 
Define the Node as an area free of the compact glial sheath 
• 
Localize voltage-gated Na+ (Nav) channels in the axonal 
membrane at the node (demyelination causes usually 
re-distribution of Na+ channels along the axon and reduced 
nerve conduction) 
• 
Localize axonal Kv channels on either side of the node (critical) 
• 
Attach the ends of the myelin sheaths to the axon on either 
side of the node so that current cannot easily pass under the 
myelin (which would negate the membrane capacitance-reducing 
and resistance-increasing effects) 
Arancibia-Carcamo and Attwell, 2014 



Pathologies of Nodes of Ranvier in Multiple Sclerosis 



Normal physiology: Paranodal 
junctions segregate Nav from 
Kv channels 
Multiple sclerosis: Node 
elongation with loss of NF155 
may allow aberrant extracellular 
current flow to juxtaparanode 
(aberrant activation of Kv 
channels) 

Multiple sclerosis: Node 
and paranode elongation with 
redistribution of Kv into 
paranode 

Multiple sclerosis: Myelin 
retraction, paranodal loop 
eversion, node lengthening and 
mixing of Nav, Kv and Caspr 

Arancibia-Carcamo and Attwell, 2014 



Myelination Appears to Be of Obvious 
Physiological Importance 


But When and Why Does Myelination 
Make Real Sense? 



Why and When Does Myelination Make Sense? 



(PNS) 
Fiber Diameter (µm) 
Conduction Velocity (m/s) 
Myelinated 
Non-Myelinated 
Strategy to increase speed of nerve impulses 

without increasing axonal calibers tremendously 


Reaches Optimum 

Vertebrates: 

• Evolutionary Advantage 
• Limited Body Size 
• Energetically Favorable 
Thresholds of Fiber / Axonal 
Calibers for Myelination: 

PNS: 1 µm / (CNS: 0.2 – 0.8 µm) 

Squid 


Rushton, 1951; Hartline and Colman, 2007 



Recent Surprise in CNS Myelination Research 


In the CNS, it was known that there is some variability 
to the rule (i.e. some overlaps of myelinated and 
non-myelinated axons of comparable small calibers, 
or occasionally myelin thickness of some axons not 
perfectly fitting to the proportionality rule), but it was 
always assumed that a given healthy axon which 
has reached myelination competency (i.e. a 
caliber above 0.8 µm) is myelinated all the 
way along the axon…
but then, Tomassy et al., 2014 published the following: 

Distinct Profiles of Myelin Distribution Along Single Axons of 
Some Pyramidal Neurons in the Neocortex 



Serial EM reconstructions 
of neurons with long 
unmyelinated initial 
segments (left) or 
intermittent myelin (right) 
Unmyelinated axon tracts 
are highlighted in green 
and myelinated tracts in 
magenta. Yellow, selected 
synapses mapped on the 
intermittently (un-) 
myelinated axon 
Ax, axon; Nu, nucleus; 
Psd, postsynaptic density 
High-resolution 
rendering of three 
representative 
neurons displaying 
different 
myelination modes 

Native positions of 
neurons are 
preserved in the 
rendering 

Arrowheads 
mark the 
boundaries of 
myelinated tracts 
(white) 

Note that axons have approximately the same caliber 


Tomassy et al., 2014 



Why Has This Not Been Detected Before? 
Technical Advances Drive Research 


And occasionally also $$$... 



The Connectome Project 




Two Apical Dendrite Segments of Layer 5 Pyramidal 
Neurons in the Somatosensory Cortex 



Swanson and Lichtman, 2016 



Mapping of Node of Ranvier 


Astrocytes 


Fields et al., 2015 



Major Findings by Tomassy et al., 2014 and Questions Raised 


• Adult neurons located in pyramidal neurons in layers II/III displayed a patchwork 
pattern of myelinated segments along the axons 
• 
Long unmyelinated stretches were found to be intercalated in between the 
different internodes (i.e. myelin segments) 
• Unusually long unmyelinated stretches (AIS) were present between the axon 
hillock (i.e. axon beginning) and the start of the first internode 
Consequences for axonal conduction: 

• The position of the first internode may affect the arrangement of the axon initial 
segment, which in turn regulates action potential initiation and modulation 
• Large unmyelinated gaps along the axons will increase their capacitance and 
thereby modify the speed of conduction 
Some open questions: 

• What regulates myelination (or rather “non-myelination”) of pyramidal neurons? 
• What is the consequence for the network? Conductivity? Stability? Plasticity? 
(e.g. late “de novo” myelination could assure myelination adjusted to needs) 
• Is this phenomenon common, also in other regions of the CNS? 

In the PNS, the Initial Myelination Decision 
Is Optimized and Fixed 


• Axons which benefit from myelination for nerve conduction 
(i.e. with a caliber above 1 µm) are myelinated in the PNS 
• Vice Versa: Myelinated axons with a size where myelination is 
not beneficial for nerve conduction (i.e. with an axonal caliber 
below 1 µm) are usually not present in the PNS 
It follows that the decision process of which axons get myelinated 
(i.e. determining the axonal caliber threshold and the 
responsible regulatory signaling) needs to be tightly 
controlled to achieve optimized function 



Myelin Thickness is Roughly Proportional to Axon Caliber 


Myelin Thickness 
PNS: 1 µm / CNS: 0.2 - 0.4 µm 
PNS (and most 
of the time, also 
in the CNS) 



Myelinated peripheral nerve Axon diameter 


Large caliber axons have thinker myelin sheaths than small caliber axons 



Historical Perspective J. Physiol. (1951), 115, 101-122 J. Physiol. (1951), 115, 101-122 
“ 
“ (Steve Waxman) 
* * 
Correct Myelin Geometry is Critical in Health and Disease 

Too Thin Myelin: Reduced Nerve Conduction 
Too Thick Myelin: Reduced Nerve Conduction, Unstable Myelin 


In the PNS, myelin thickness is highly optimized 
In the CNS, myelin is slightly thinner than the theoretical optimum. i.e. 
there is some but limited room for increasing myelin and improving 
conduction velocity before the critical (optimal) thickness is reached 
*usually correlated Waxman, 1997 



Myelin Thickness of a Given Axon Is Highly 
Optimized and Fixed in the PNS 


• Myelin sheath thickness is roughly proportional to the 
axonal caliber 
• This arrangement is optimized to maximize conduction 
It follows that also the control of myelin thickness (i.e. determining which 
axonal caliber should be associated with which thickness of myelin, 
together with the associated regulatory signaling) needs to be 
tightly controlled to obtain optimized function 



Correct Myelin Geometry is Critical in Health and Disease 



Too Thin Myelin: Reduced Nerve Conduction 
Too Thick Myelin: Reduced Nerve Conduction 
(Secondary: Unstable Myelin) 

Examples of Diseases: What can we learn from them? 


• Demyelinating Neuropathies: Demyelination / partial remyelination 
• Dysmyelinating Neuropathies: Abormal myelination / (demyelination) 

Myelin Thickness Abnormalities in PMP22-Based Inherited Neuropathies 


Normal HNPP CMT1A Severe CMT1 
PMP22: Normal Deletion (heteroz.) Duplication (heteroz.) Point-Mutation (heteroz.) 


Suter and Scherer, 2003 



Typical Pathological Findings in Demyelinating Neuropathies 


Relation to Nerve Conduction 



• Almost normal myelin thickness / conduction (well re-emyelinated after de-myelination) 
• Thinly myelinated / reduced conduction (limited re-myelination after de-myelination) 
•De-myelinated / reduced or blocked conduction 
(not re-myelinated) 
Note: One axon has multiple internodes 
that might be differently affected 



Red: High Membrane Currents 

Freeman et al., 2015 


Includes 
Distal 
Sensory Loss 


CMT1A Normal 

Demyelinating Hereditary Motor and Sensory Neuropathies 
(Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease, CMT) 
Reduced Nerve Conduction Velocity 

Bernd Rautenstrauss 



The Name Providers 


Charcot Marie Tooth 



Neurologists in 19th Century; first description of disease 



* 


1:2500 people affected by CMT, about 150,000 in the USA 
*Causes Hereditary Neuropathy with Liability to Pressure Palsy 



HNPP (deletion) 
CMT1A (duplication) 
Chromosome 17 
HNPP (deletion) 
CMT1A (duplication) 
Chromosome 17 
Steven Scherer 



Mutant PMP22 Protein is Retained Within the Cell 


Cell expresses normal (wild type) PMP22 Cells express mutant PMP22 



Defective intracellular transport is a common disease mechanism 

Green: PMP22 
Red: Marker protein for endoplasmic reticulum 

Naef et al., 1997 



PMP22-Transgenic Rats as Genetic Model for CMT1A 



CMT1 rats carry three additional 
copies of the PMP22 gene 


Sereda et al., 1996 



Demyelination in CMT1A Rats 


T: Thinly myelinated axon 
OB: Onion bulb formations 
A: Amyelinated axon 
OB 
Sereda et al., 1996; Fledrich et al., 2014 



Reduced Nerve Conduction Velocity 


CMT1A rat 


Sciatic nerve compound motor action potential (CMAP) 

• Electrical stimulation of nerve / recording from muscle innervated by this nerve 
• Measure traveling time of electrical impulse from stimulation to recording electrode (“latency”; ms) 
• Measure size of the response (“amplitude”; mV) 
• Determine NCV based on distance of electrodes and traveling time of impulse. For more accurate 
measurements, use recordings at two different sites (distal / proximal) 
Sereda et al., 1996 



Therapeutic Reversal of PMP22 Overexpression in CMT1A 


Levels of 
PMP22 
mRNA 
expression 



? 80 - 120% 

1.5-fold PMP22 

Normal 100 % 

gene dosage 

Therapy 

CMT1A 



Hum Mol Genet. (2001), 10, 1007-1018 

Induced Myelination and Demyelination in a Conditional 
Mouse Model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 1A 


Perea et al. 

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A, a hereditary demyelinating neuropathy, is 
usually caused by overexpression of peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) due to a 
genomic duplication. We have generated a transgenic mouse model in which mouse 
pmp22 overexpression can be regulated. In this mouse model, overexpression of 
pmp22 occurs specifically in Schwann cells of the peripheral nerve and is switched off 
when the mice are fed tetracycline. Overexpression of pmp22 throughout life (in the 
absence of tetracycline) causes demyelination. In contrast, myelination is nearly 
normal when pmp22 overexpression is switched off throughout life by feeding the 
mice tetracycline. When overexpression of pmp22 is switched off in adult mice, 
correction begins within 1 week and myelination is well advanced by 3 months 
(although the myelin sheaths are still thinner than normal), indicating that the 
Schwann cells are poised to start myelination. Upregulation of the gene in adult mice 
(which had previously had normal pmp22 expression) is followed by active 
demyelination within 1 week, which had plateaued by 8 weeks. This indicates that 
Schwann cells with mature myelin are sensitive to increased amounts of pmp22 such 
that they rapidly demyelinate. Thus, demyelination can largely be corrected within a 
few months, but the correction will be sensitive to subsequent upregulation of pmp22. 


CMT1A Disease Progression 


• Clinical Symptoms: 
• Nerve Conduction Velocity: 
• Myelin Pathology: 
• Axon Pathology: 
Time 


(Distal) Axonal Degeneration in Demyelinating Neuropathies 


remyelinated 
Distal axonal 
degeneration 
in a disease 
that originates 
exclusively 
from Schwann 
cells: Why? 

Steven Scherer 



Genetic Variability 
of CMT 
Genetic Variability 
of CMT 
Affected proteins disturb myelinated nerves: “Functional Genetic Screen” 
Berciano, 2011 



Common Pathway in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease? 



Demyelinating CMT 

Demyelination followed 
by axonal damage and 
degeneration 

Axonal CMT 
Loss of myelinated axons 
without demyelination 


Normal Axonal CMT 

Nave et al., 2007 


Axonal Transport Is a Bottleneck for the Health of Neurons 


Nat. Rev. Neurosci. (2013), 14, 161-176. 
Axonal transport deficits and neurodegenerative diseases 


Millecamps and Julien 


The intracellular transport of organelles along an axon is crucial for the 
maintenance and function of a neuron. Anterograde axonal transport has a role 
in supplying proteins and lipids to the distal synapse and mitochondria for local 
energy requirements, whereas retrograde transport is involved in the clearance 
of misfolded and aggregated proteins from the axon and the intracellular 
transport of distal trophic signals to the soma. Axonal transport can be affected 
by alterations to various components of the transport machinery. Here, we review 
the current state of knowledge about axonal transport defects that might 
contribute to the pathogenesis of particular neurodegenerative diseases. 

In Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies / Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias 
/ Parkinson’s disease / Huntington’s disease / Motorneuron diseases (direct and/or indirect effects) 

Compare axonal length to size of neuronal cell body 



Why Are Axons Dying Distally? 


Example of a 
sensory neuron, 
tried to draw 
to scale 
Neurons are the longest cells in body: Transport Problems! 

Steven Scherer 


Fast Axonal Transport (Some Main Cargo) 



(Cytoskeletal elements: Slow axonal transport) Basic Neurochemistry, Siegel et al., 1999 



http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867412015516 Zala et al., 2013 



Mutations in Direct Players (Road, Motors, Cargo-Associates) 
Cause Axonal-Degeneration Diseases in Humans 


KIF1A 
KIF5A 
RAB7 
DYNC1H1, DCTN1 
TUBB3 
Holzbaur and Scherer, 2011 



Specific Aims / Conceptual Strategy 

• Understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms 
underlying the developmental and homeostatic 
phenomena of myelination and what goes wrong 
in associated disorders 
• Generate and analyze suitable (disease) models 
in animals (and cellular systems) to understand the 
underlying mechanisms (in comparison to parallel 
studies in humans): 
• Combine the knowledge obtained from basic science 
(i.e. how does the system work?) with preclinical 
research (i.e. what is the basis of the malfunction?) 
and extend to applied research (i.e. find a treatment) 

What are Suitable (Disease) Models 
When and Why? 



The Zebrafish Model 




Dynamics of Oligodendrocyte Development 
and Myelination (Zebrafish) 



Mathews and Appel, 2016 



Kirby et al., 2006 
66


Kirby et al., 2006 



Successful Screening for PNS Myelination Mutants in Zebrafish 



(Kommentar - Textfeld one can increase cAMP a bit and Schwann cells can myelinate better.)
Adenylate 
(Kommentar - Textfeld point mutation of gpr126 mutant is here
)
(Kommentar - Textfeld oct6 is the transcription factor that leads to that phenotype in the mutant.)
Cyclase 6 



(Kommentar - Textfeld gpr126 is essential for myelination. it activates Adcy6.)
*Phenotype in Zebrafish could be rescued* 
(Notiz made_
27.02.2017 10:30:46
Unmarked festgelegt von made_) 
with forskolin which elevates cAMP 

Lyons and Talbot, 2014 


Unbiased (but Aim-Targeted) Screens 
(in Suitable Models) Can Lead to 
Major Discoveries 


Robustness of Readouts and Efficient Throughput Are the Keys 



Hum. Mol. Genet. (2014), 23, 2279-2289. 

Mutations in CNTNAP1 (CASPR) and ADCY6 Are Responsible for Severe 
Arthrogryposis Multiplex Congenita with Axoglial Defects 


Laquérriere et al. 

Non-syndromic arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is characterized by multiple 
congenital contractures resulting from reduced fetal mobility. Genetic mapping and whole 
exome sequencing (WES) were performed in 31 multiplex and/or consanguineous 
undiagnosed AMC families. Although this approach identified known AMC genes, we here 
report pathogenic mutations in two new genes. Homozygous frameshift mutations in 
CNTNAP1 were found in four unrelated families. Patients showed a marked reduction in 
motor nerve conduction velocity (<10 m/s) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of 
sciatic nerve in the index cases revealed severe abnormalities of both nodes of Ranvier 
width and myelinated axons. CNTNAP1 encodes CASPR, an essential component of 
node of Ranvier domains which underlies saltatory conduction of action potentials along 
the myelinated axons, an important process for neuronal function. A homozygous 
missense mutation in adenylate cyclase 6 gene (ADCY6) was found in another family 
characterized by a lack of myelin in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) as determined 
by TEM. Morpholino knockdown of the zebrafish orthologs led to severe and specific 
defects in peripheral myelin in spite of the presence of Schwann cells. ADCY6 encodes a 
protein that belongs to the adenylate cyclase family responsible for the synthesis of cAMP. 
Elevation of cAMP can mimic axonal contact in vitro and upregulates myelinating signals. 
Our data indicate an essential and so far unknown role of ADCY6 in PNS myelination 
likely through the cAMP pathway. Mutations of genes encoding proteins of Ranvier 
domains or involved in myelination of Schwann cells are responsible for novel and severe 
human axoglial diseases. 


Am. J. Hum. Genet. (2015), 96, 955-961. 
Mutations of GPR126 are responsible for severe 
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita 

Ravenscroft et al. 

Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita is defined by the presence of contractures across two 
or more major joints and results from reduced or absent fetal movement. Here, we present 
three consanguineous families affected by lethal arthrogryposis multiplex congenita. By 
whole-exome or targeted exome sequencing, it was shown that the probands each 
harbored a different homozygous mutation (one missense, one nonsense, and one 
frameshift mutation) in GPR126. GPR126 encodes G-protein-coupled receptor 126, which 
has been shown to be essential for myelination of axons in the peripheral nervous system 
in fish and mice. A previous study reported that Gpr126(-/-) mice have a lethal 
arthrogryposis phenotype. We have shown that the peripheral nerves in affected 
individuals from one family lack myelin basic protein, suggesting that this disease in 
affected individuals is due to defective myelination of the peripheral axons during fetal 
development. Previous work has suggested that autoproteolytic cleavage is important for 
activating GPR126 signaling, and our biochemical assays indicated that the missense 
substitution (p.Val769Glu [c.2306T>A]) impairs autoproteolytic cleavage of GPR126. Our 
data indicate that GPR126 is critical for myelination of peripheral nerves in humans. This 
study adds to the literature implicating defective axoglial function as a key cause of severe 
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and suggests that GPR126 mutations should be 
investigated in individuals affected by this disorder. 


What are the Cellular and Molecular 
Mechanisms Behind these Findings? 


What Activates the Pathway? 



E9-10 E12/13 
(Mouse) 
Birth 
Over P8 
E: Embryonic 
P: Postnatal 
E15/16 
(Kommentar - Textfeld this one ->
is myelinating)
(Differentiation transitions are not fully synchronized in time) 


Jessen and Mirsky, 1999 



Mechanisms of GPR126/ADGRG6 Function 



Prp (Prion Protein) 
Null mice develop 
a Demyelinating 
Neuropathy (revealed 
normal function of Prp) 

Neurons: Blue 

Schwann cells (SC): Orange 

Basal lamina maturation is a critical prerequisite for myelination 

Mogha et al., 2016 


https://mjlprionsdiseases.files.wordpress.com/2012/04/cjd-prion-in-neurons.jpg 



The Mouse as Model Organism 



(Kommentar - Textfeld very important homepage on how to carry out a technique etc. Made by scientists (videos). Use it extensively and learn from it.)
https://www.jove.com/ 


An Introduction to the Laboratory Mouse Mus Musculus 


https://www.jove.com/science-education/5129/an-introduction-to-the-laboratory-mouse-mus-musculus 


(Kommentar - Textfeld must go via VPn, since it is not publically available
)

Why the Mouse as Model System 


• 
Mammalian experimental system, highly relevant for disease: 
Inflammation, immune system, metabolism 

• 
Standardized behavioral analysis 
• 
Myelination is a vertebrate invention, often affected by inflammation 
• 
Mammalian specificity, for example complexity of neural progenitor 
features and regulation of myelination (regional differences) 

Imaging in the Mouse Nervous System 


Microglia Neurons 



Oligodendrocytes 

Axon tracts 


Immune cells 

Vasculature 


Alzheimer’s disease 

Nerve injury 

Epilepsy 

ALS 
Spinal cord injury Stroke 
Tumours 

Neuroinflammation 
Multiple Sclerosis 



Longitudinal Imaging in the Mouse 


Time-lapse imaging in the living animal provides valuable 
information on structural reorganization in the intact brain. Here, 
we introduce a thinned-skull preparation that allows transcranial 
imaging of fluorescently labeled synaptic structures in the living 
mouse cortex by two-photon microscopy. 

http://www.jove.com/video/51520/two-photon-vivo-imaging-dendritic-spines-mouse-cortex-using-thinned 

Application to progenitor dynamics: Transgenically-labeled 
(oligodendroyte) progenitors (white) in the the adult mouse brain 
after a lesion 


http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/v16/n6/extref/nn.3390-S8.mov 

Hughes et al., 2013 



Brainbow Mice 



(Kommentar - Textfeld Cells are labelled with different colors and can be observed individually.)
Cerebellum 

Hippocampus 

Livet et al., 2007 


Motor Axons Cortex 



Livet et al., 2007 



Brainbow Mice (Synapses) 



B6;CBA-Tg(Thy1-Brainbow1.0)HLich/J 


Livet et al., 2007 



Conditional DNA Segment (Gene) Deletion 

The Cre / loxP System 

P*

"Cre Mouse” 


"lox"-mouse (allele) 
Cre DNA / gene (segment) to be deleted 


(Kommentar - Textfeld Learn Cre/loxP system. Most other students are familiar with it.)
Breeding 


DNA segment gets deleted 
depending on specific 
activity of *Promoter 

• P*: Gene promoter with tissue- (cell type-) specific activity 
• Cre: Cre recombinase (from bacteria, no target sequences in eukaryotes) 
• LoxP site(s): Identical 34 bp DNA segment(s); serve as Cre target sequences 
Most common application: Conditional (cell type-) specific inactivation of a gene 

(Kommentar - Textfeld ER is mutated and does not react to estrogen.)
Temporally-Controlled (Gene) Alterations 

Chimeric 
Estroge 
Artificial estrogen analogue 
The CreER / loxP System 
The Cre-ER fusion protein carries a nuclear localization signal 
that is blocked by HSP90 in the non-induced state 



Brainbow Mice 


Transgenic promoter driving 
ubiquitous Cre expression 
(Kommentar - Textfeld those transgenes give rise to these multiple colors that can label the cells, see the tables)
• Use of lox sites that are 
functionally incompatible 
among each other 
• Multiple copies of 
transgene integrated 
in genome (three are 
illustrated as example) 
(Use of CreER allows 
to vary overall efficiency 
of recombination by 
varying dose of tamoxifen) 

Livet et al., 2007 



Application to Myelinating Cells (With Adjusted Transgenic Strategy) 



Arrowheads 
indicate 
Nodes of 
Ranvier 


Oligodenrocytes 


Schwann Cells 



Dumas et al., 2014 



